UPDATED- City to Spray Insecticide Tonight and Wednesday to Kill Mosquitoes
Targeted Effort Fights West Nile Virus in Beverly, Auburn Gresham, Forest Glen, North Park and Austin
Efrat Stein    312.747.9805 efrat.stein@cityofchicago.org

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

The City of Chicago Department of Public Health (CDPH) is continuing their efforts against West Nile Virus by spraying to kill adult mosquitoes Tonight (Tuesday) and tomorrow night (Wednesday)

UPDATED:

Spraying will occur TONIGHT  in sections of  Auburn Gresham (the 18th, and 21st wards.)  

On Wednesday spraying will occur in sections of Beverly, Forest Glen, North Park and Austin (the 19,36, 41, 39, 40 and a small portion of the 50th wards)

In all of these locations CDPH traps recently yielded mosquitoes carrying West Nile Virus.

Download spray zone maps here:

Wards 18, 19 and 21

Ward 36

Ward 39, 40 and 50

Ward 41

"When our mosquito traps indicate that the West Nile Virus may threaten human health in a community, we take decisive action promptly," stated Chicago Department of Public Health (CDPH) Commissioner Bechara Choucair, M.D.

Weather permitting (rain), the spraying will begin at about 8:00 p.m. on both Tuesday July 24th, and July 25th 2012. On both nights, spraying will continue through the night until approximately 1:00am, with licensed mosquito abatement technicians in trucks dispensing an ultra-low-volume spray.

Spraying will occur starting at dusk, the peak period of mosquito activity and exposure of the Northern House Mosquito, the type of insect that spreads West Nile Virus.

The material being used to control the adult mosquitoes, Zenivex, will be applied at a rate of 1.5 fluid ounces per acre. It is approved for use by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and is used to control mosquitoes in outdoor residential and recreational areas.

Zenivex is a synthetic pyrethroid product. Zenivex has been used effectively to control disease-carrying mosquitoes and is non-persistent, decomposing rapidly in the environment. This rapid degradation of this product makes it an excellent choice for control of WNV-carrying mosquitoes.

The spray will be applied by technicians from Vector Disease Control International a leader in the mosquito control industry. Guiding the crews through the streets will be supervisors from the Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation.

While the spray is not harmful to people or pets and is routinely sprayed in residential areas across the nation, residents of targeted neighborhoods may choose to stay indoors and close their windows while spraying is underway, as an extra precaution.

"Spraying to kill adult mosquitoes is a sensible and effective component of an integrated pest management program. We spray when we have clear evidence that the West Nile Virus has made significant inroads into a community," added CDPH Environmental Health Medical Director Cort Lohff, M.D. "It is our expectation that this effort, by further limiting the mosquito population, will prevent cases of human illness in Chicago."

The Northern House mosquito, Culex pipiens, is the primary carrier of West Nile virus. This mosquito species thrives in water with high organic content, such as that found in catch basins (storm sewers). Consequently, a hot, dry summer increases the risk of West Nile virus infection, exactly the opposite of what many people believe.

In contrast, the swarms of mosquitoes most people currently are experiencing are Aedes vexans, which is a common "floodwater" mosquito that appears after heavy rains. This mosquito may be a nuisance, but they rarely are infected with West Nile Virus.

West Nile virus is transmitted through the bite of a mosquito that has picked up the virus by feeding on an infected bird.  Common West Nile virus symptoms include fever, nausea, headache and muscle aches. 

Symptoms may last from a few days to a few weeks.  However, four out of five people infected with West Nile virus will not show any symptoms.  In rare cases, severe illness including meningitis or encephalitis, or even death, can occur.  People older than 50 are at higher risk for severe illness from West Nile virus.

The best way to prevent West Nile disease or any other mosquito-borne illness is to reduce the number of mosquitoes around your home and to take personal precautions to avoid mosquito bites. 

Especially important is the use of insect repellant containing DEET, Picaridin, or Oil of Lemon Eucalyptus.

In addition to using insect repellant to avoid bites, CDPH  officials advise:

Consider limiting outdoor activity after dark (dusk to dawn), which is when Northern House Mosquito is most active.
When outside between dusk and dawn, wear loose-fitting, light-colored clothing that includes long pants, long-sleeved shirts, socks and shoes.
Check to see that all screen on doors and windows are tight-fitting and free of holes and tears.
Encourage neighbors to exercise precautions.
To limit mosquito breeding opportunities, CDPH officials recommend:

draining and replacing water in birdbaths and children's backyard wading pools every four to five days;
properly disposing of old tires, jars, cans, pans, bottles, buckets and other unwanted containers that can hold standing water;
making sure that rain gutters, downspouts, swimming pools and pool covers are free of standing water;
keeping grass and weeds cut short to eliminate hiding places for adult mosquitoes
For prevention tips and updates on West Nile Virus activity in Chicago, visit  www.cityofchicago.org/health. 

For an expert national perspective on West Nile Virus, visit the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on the Internet at www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/index.htm.

West Nile Disease, Reported Cases in Chicago:

2002      225 cases, 22 fatalities

2003      4 cases, 0 fatalities

2004      6 cases, 1 fatality

2005      41 cases, 1 fatality

2006      29 cases, 1 fatality

2007      11 cases, 0 fatalities

2008      4 cases, 0 fatalities

2009      1 case, 0 fatalities

2010      1 case, 0 fatalities

2011      8 cases, 0 fatalities